# ACID Properties 
* A `transaction` is a single logical unit of work which accesses and possibly modifies the content of a database. 
* In order to maintain `consistency` certain properties are maintained before and after the transaction, known as ACID Properties. 
1. **Atomicity**: The entire transaction takes place at once or doesn't happen at all
2. **Consistency**: The database must be consistent before and after the transaction. 
3. **Isolation**: Multiple transaction occur independently without interference. 
4. **Durability**: The changes of a successful transaction occurs even if the system failure occur.

## Atomicity( All or Nothing)
* Either all transaction takes place at once or doesn't happen at all. 
* Each transaction is considered as **one unit**
* It can have two operations: 
    * **Abort**: If a transaction aborts, changes made to database are not visible.
    * **Commit**: If a transaction commits, changes made are visible. Atomicity is also known as **All or nothing rule**

## Consistency 
* Integrity constraints must be maintained so that the database is consistent before and after the transaction. 
* It refers to correctness of database.
* Data should always move from one consistent state to another. 

## Isolation 
*  This property ensures that multiple transaction can occur concurrently without leading to the inconsistency of database state. 
* transactions occurs independently without interference. 
* Changes occurring in a particular transaction is not visible to all the other transactions. 

## Durability
* This property ensures that once the transaction has completed execution, the updates and modifications to the database are stored in and written to disk and they persists even if a system failure occurs. 
