# DML (Select, Insert, Delete, Update)

## **Select**: 
```
SELECT [ ALL | DISTINCT ]
  [ TOP (top_value) [ PERCENT ] [ WITH TIES ] ]
expressions
FROM tables
  [WHERE conditions]
  [GROUP BY expressions]
  [HAVING condition]
  [ORDER BY expression [ ASC | DESC ]];
```
* **Parameters or Arguments**
    1. **ALL**: Optional; Returns all matching rows.
    2. **DISTINCT**: Optional; Removes duplicates from the result set. 
    3. **TOP(top_value)**: Optional; If specified, it will return the top number of rows in the result set based on **top_value**. Eg, TOP(10) - will return top 10 rows from the full result set. 
    4. **PERCENT**: Optional; If specified, then the top rows are based on a percentage of the total result set(as specified by the **top_value**). Eg, **TOP(10) PERCENT** would return the top 10% of the full result set. 
    5. **WITH TIES**: Optional; if specified, then rows tied in last place within the limited result set are returned. This may result in more rows be returned than the TOP parameter permits. 
    6. **Expressions**: The columns or calculations that you wish to retrieve. Use * if you want to select all the columns. 
    7. **Tables**: The tables that you wish to retrieve records from. There must be at least one table listed int he FROM clause. 
    8. **WHERE conditions**: Optional; The conditions that must be met for the records to be selected. 
    9. **GROUP BY expressions**: Optional; It collects data across multiple records and groups the results by one or more columns. 
    10. **HAVING condition**: Optional; It is used in combination with the GROUP BY to restrict the groups returned rows to only those whose the condition is TRUE.  
    11. **ORDER BY condition**: Optional; It is used to sort the records in your result set. ASC sorts in ascending order and DESC sorts in descending order. 

```
SELECT TOP(50) percent [EmpID]
    , [EmpName]
    , [Designation]
    , [Department]
    , [JoiningDate]
FROM [testDB].[dbo].[Employee]
```

### Select Distinct 
* Gets only distinct values from the specified column in the select statement. 
* Distinct ignores null values. It means distinct operator **treats NULL duplicate**. It means that the two NULLs are the same. Therefore, if the select statement returns NULLs, the DISTINCT returns only one NULL. 

### Where Statement 
* Used to get rows which satisfy the given condition. 
* The filtering condition can be a **single logical expression or group of logical expression.** Logical expression is known as **PREDICATE**. 
* In **Filter Condition**, We can use **AND, OR, BETWEEN (*where price 10 and 20*), IN (*where price in (10, 11, 31)*), LIKE**

#### Any Operator 
* It is used to compare scalar value with the single column value returned by any sub query. 
* **Syntax**: `scalar_expression_comparison_operator ANY (sub query)`

**EXAMPLE** 
  ```
  select product_name, list_price 
  from   production.products
  where  product_id = ANY (
                            select 
                              product_id 
                            from 
                              sales.order_items
                            where 
                              quantity >= 2
                          )
  order by product_name
  ```
  <br/>

#### All Operator 
* It is used to compare a scalar value with a single column values returned by any sub queries. 
* **Syntax**: `scalar_expression_comparison_operator ALL (sub-query)`
* It returns true if all values returned by the sub-query returned by the sub-query satisfies the condition. 

**EXAMPLE**
```
SELECT ProductName
FROM Products
WHERE ProductID = ALL
  (SELECT ProductID
  FROM OrderDetails
  WHERE Quantity = 10);
```

### Group By 
* The GROUP BY statement groups rows that have the same values into summary rows. 
* it is commonly used with the aggregation function which does the calculation on the group and returns one unique value for a group. 

```
Select expression1, expression2, .... expression_n, 
       aggregate_function(expression)
From tables 
[Where conditions]
Group By expression1, expression2, ... expression_n;
```

* **Parameters or Arguments** 
    1. **expression1, expression2, ... expression_n**: The expressions that are not encapsulated within an aggregate function and must be included in the group by clause. 
    2. **aggregate_function**: It can be a function such as [SUM](https://www.techonthenet.com/sql_server/functions/sum.php), [COUNT](https://www.techonthenet.com/sql_server/functions/count.php), [MIN](https://www.techonthenet.com/sql_server/functions/min.php), [MAX](https://www.techonthenet.com/sql_server/functions/max.php) or [AVG](https://www.techonthenet.com/sql_server/functions/avg.php) functions
    3. **tables**: The tables that you wish to retrieve records from. There must be atleast one table listed in the FROM clause. 
    4. **Where conditions**: Optional; The conditions that must be met for the records to be selected. 

> **NOTE** If we want to select any column which is not mentioned in the group by clause then that column must be passed as an input parameter to any aggregate function otherwise the query will result into error. 
<br/>

**Example**
```
    select manager_id, COUNT(*) as 'Number of employees'
    from employees
    where last_name = 'Anderson'
    group by manager_id
```

```
    select product_type, MIN(quantity) as 'Lowest quantity'
    from products 
    group by product_type
```

```
    select department, MAX(salary) as 'Highest Salary' 
    from employees 
    group by department
```

```
    select product_name, SUM(quantity) as 'Total Quantity' 
    from products 
    Group by product_name
```

```
    select 
      customer_id, 
      YEAR (order_date) order_year, 
      COUNT (order_id) order_placed
    from 
      sales.orders
    where 
      customer_id in (1,2)
    group by 
      customer_id, 
      YEAR(order_date)
    order by 
      customer_id
```

### Having Clause 
* used to restrict the data selected by group by. 
* it is used in combination with group by to filter the groups with one or more passed condition in the having clause. 
* Only column or expression in group can be included in having clause. 
* 	Because SQL Server processes the HAVING clause after the GROUP BY clause, you cannot refer to the aggregate function specified in the select list by using the column alias. The following query will fail:
```
SELECT    column_name1,    column_name2,
    aggregate_function (column_name3) column_alias
FROM    table_name
GROUP BY    column_name1,    column_name2
HAVING    column_alias > value;
```

* 	Instead, you must use the aggregate function expression in the HAVING clause explicitly as follows:

```
SELECT    column_name1,    column_name2,
    aggregate_function (column_name3) alias
FROM    table_name
GROUP BY   column_name1,    column_name2
HAVING    aggregate_function (column_name3) > value;
```

**Example** 

```
Select department, SUM(quantity) as 'Total Quantity' 
from products 
group by department 
having SUM(quantity) > 100;
```

```
Select city, COUNT(*) as 'Number of Employees' 
from employees 
where state = 'California' 
group by city 
Having count(*) > 20; 
```

### Where Vs Having 
* **Where clause cannot be used with aggregate functions** where as having clause can be used. 
* Where clause act as **pre filter** and having act as **post filter**. 
<br/>


## Select Into
* The `SELECT INTO` statement copies data from one table into a new table. 

```
SELECT expression
INTO new_table [IN externalDB]
FROM oldTable 
[WHERE conditions];
```

**Example**
>Select EmpID, EmpName into EDet from [testDB].[dbo].[Employee]
>Select * Into CustomersBackup2017 IN 'Backup.mdb' from Customers;

<br/>

> **TIP**: SELECT INTO can also be used to create a new, empty table using the schema of another. Just add a where clause that causes query to return no data: 
Select * into newTable from oldTable where 1 = 0;

## Insert into 
* The `INSERT INTO` statement is used to insert new records in a table. 
* if you want to insert values in all the columns then just mention the tableName and not the column name and pass in all values for the common. 

```
Insert into employees (employee_id, last_name, first_name)
VALUES 
(10, 'Anderson', 'Sarah')
(11, 'Johnson',  'Dale' )
```

* The `INSERT INTO SELECT` statement copies data from one table and inserts it into another table. The data type of source and target should match. 

**Scenario 1** 
```
INSERT INTO table2
SELECT * FROM table1
WHERE condition;
```

**Scenario 2**
```
INSERT INTO table2 (column1, column2, column3, ...)
SELECT column1, column2, column3, ...
FROM table1
WHERE condition;
```
<br/>

## Update Command
* Eg `update [testDB].[dbo].[Employee] set EmpName = 'MATTS' where EmpID = 1;`
* While updating one table with data from another table in SQL Server (Transact-SQL) is: 

**Scenario 1**
```
Update table1
Set column1 = (Select expression1 from table2 where conditions)
[Where conditions];
```

**Scenario 2** 
```
Update table1 
Set table1.column  = table2.expression1
From table1
Inner Join table2 
On(table1.column1 = table2.column2)
[Where conditions]
```

## Delete 

```
Delete [TOP(top_value) PERCENT]
From table 
Where conditions
```

* **Parameters or Arguments** 
    1. **table**: The table that you wish to delete records from. 
    2. **WHERE conditions**: Optional; If specified, the conditions that must be met for the records to be deleted. 
    3. **TOP(top_value)**: Optional; If specified, it will delete the top number of rows in the result set based on top_value. For example, TOP(10) would delete the top 10 rows matching the delete criteria. 
    4. **PERCENT**: Optional; If Specified, Then the top rows are based on top_value percentage of the total result set. For example, TOP(10) PERCENT would delete the top 10% of the records matching the delete criteria. 


### Using Exists clause
* using this, we can also perform more complicated deletes. 
* **When to use this**: You may wish to delete records in one table based on values in another table. Since you can't list more than one table in the SQL Server FROM clause when you are performing a delete, you can use the SQL Server `Exists` clause. 

**EXAMPLE**
```
Delete From employees 
Where Exists 
(Select * 
 FROM contacts
 WHERE contacts.contact_id = employees.employee_id
 AND contacts.contact_id < 100 );
```
